)F REXX function - perform various actions for REXX variables

General description

 REXXVARS is a general function to perform various actions for REXX
 variables - browse, copy, drop, edit, index, list, rename, sort and
 view. Some of those functions can be done using standard REXX
 features, though with some difficulties, others like index cannot.
 It can sort long variables (gt 32756 bytes), which to the best of my
 knowledge no other sort can do.

 Multiple variable specifications can be entered as input, each
 specification can be a descrete name, a mask, a stem or a stem with
 numeric tail, the latter is called a 'numstem'. See the 'Varlist'
 description below.

 The list and display actions operates in either of 2 modes:
 Numstem or standard. Numstem is when just one variable is specified
 and that variable is a numeric stem in the format stem.# (see
 'Varlist' description below). In numstem mode only the variables
 data is shown, in standard mode both the variables name and contents
 are shown.


Build: 007

 Fixed in this build
  Fix mask problem with 1 char after last asterix i.a. ABC*F


Short syntax, refer to the detailed function descriptions below.

 rc = REXXVARS(command-string)
      command-string:
       BROWSE    VAR(varlist) PANEL(panel)
       COPY      VAR(varlist) | STack
                 AS(newnamemask or stemname) | TOStack
                 ÝONData(mask)¨
                 ÝCOUNT(countn)¨ ÝLAST(lastn)¨ ÝSKIP(skipn)¨
       EDIT      VAR(varlist) PANEL(panel) ÝSHow(show)¨
       DROP      VAR(varlist)
       INDEX     VAR(varlist) AS(stemname) ÝALL¨
       LIST      VAR(varlist) ÝONData(mask)¨ ÝNW(namewidth)¨
                 ÝLW(listwidth)¨ ÝHDR(hdrtext)¨ ÝSHow(show)¨
                 ÝCOUNT(countn)¨ ÝLAST(lastn)¨ ÝSKIP(skipn)¨
       RENAME    VAR(varlist) AS(newnamemask)
       SORT      VAR(stemname) ÝFIELDS(sort-fields)¨
                 ÝAS(stemname)¨ ÝONData(mask)¨ ÝNODUP¨
                 ÝDescending¨ ÝMODE(E|I)¨
       STEM2TBL  STEM(stemname) | STack TABLE(table) VAR(varname)
       TBL2STEM  TABLE(table) VAR(varname) STEM(stemname) | TOStack
       VERSION
       VIEW      VAR(varlist) PANEL(panel) ÝSHow(show)¨

  rc    is the response as follows:
         0   ok
        >0   not ok, see the REXXVARS_RSN variable for details

Browse

 Browse displays variables in an ISPF screen. The record format and
 length is variable and 32752.
  You see the variable name followed by an equal sign (=) and the
 data.
  You can specify the panel to use.


Copy

 Copy variable(s) under control of a mask, see the section 'Mask for
 altering values' later. In addition to the normal name selection,
 you can also use the ONDATA parameter to filter on data content, see
 the section 'Mask for filtering values' later. When varlist is one
 numstem name and the newname causes the varlist entry to end in a
 dot, either specifically or by applying it as a mask, then the
 program will build output stem sequence numbers including stem.0.
 Likewise when the varlist is one stemname and the newname ends in .#
 then the program will also build an output stem with sequence
 numbers and stem.0

 If you are copying to an ISPF table then the table must exist
 beforehand. The program will do TBADDs, so if the table contains
 more than one name the other table variables will be set to their
 default value.

 If you are copying from an ISPF table then only the named variable
 becomes the stem.

 Samples
  copy var(wh*) as(+'q.z'*)
   Variables WHO WHAT and WHERE are copied to Q.ZWHO, Q.ZWHAT and
   Q.ZWHERE.
  copy var(text.#) as(+c*) ondata(*Doctor*)
   Variables TEXT.n are copied to CTEXT.n if they contain 'Doctor'.
  copy var(text.#) as(newtext.) ondata(*Doctor*)
   Variables TEXT.n are copied to NEWTEXT.n with properly ascending
   sequence numbers and NEWTEXT.0 is created.
  copy var(text.) as(name.#)
   Stem TEXT.* is copied as numeric stem NAME.n, incl NAME.0.
  copy stack as(dynpnl.#)
   The stack is copied as numeric stem DYNPNL.n, incl DYNPNL.0. The
   stack entries are deleted.


Drop

 Drop variable(s) under control of a mask, see the section
 'Mask for filtering values' later. The REXX DROP command is
 normally recommended, but REXXVARS offers wildcarding.

 Samples
  parse value 'Kilroy was here yesterday' with who what where when
  drop var(whe*)
   Will drop WHERE and WHEN.


Edit

 Edit presents variables in an ISPF screen. It operates in either
 standard or numstem mode. The record format and length is variable
 and 32752.

 You can modify data in both modes.

 In standard mode you see the variable name followed by an equal
 sign (=) and the data. You can create new variables by overwriting a
 line or adding a new line. Note that blanks following the equal sign
 are kept, but trailing blanks are stripped. Blanks between the
 variable name and the equal sign are ignored. You can delete
 variables by deleting the line.

 In numstem mode only the data is shown and the line number is the
 stem sequence number and becomes the stem sequence trail when saved.
 Any superfluous compound variables are dropped when saved.

 You can specify the panel to use.


Index

 Index creates a numeric stem from a nun-numeric stem. The purpose
 is to enable access to a non-numeric stem by sequence.
 The output stem (AS parameter) may be the same as the input stem.

  Sample
    stem cars.  before INDEX:
     cars.ford  =  'Old USA car maker'
     cars.audi  =  'German producer of very nice cars'
     cars.wv    =  'German car for the common people'
     cars.mazda =  'We had a couple of those japanese cars'
    make index
     cc=RexxVars('Index var(cars.) as(cars.)')
    stem cars. after INDEX:
     CARS.AUDI  =  'German producer of very nice cars'
     CARS.FORD  =  'Old USA car maker'
     CARS.MAZDA =  'We had a couple of those japanese cars'
     CARS.WV    =  'German car for the common people'
     CARS.0     =  00000004
     CARS.1     =  'CARS.AUDI'
     CARS.2     =  'CARS.FORD'
     CARS.3     =  'CARS.MAZDA'
     CARS.4     =  'CARS.WV'
    Listing by sequence
     do n=1 to cars.0
       say n'='cars.n'->'value(cars.n)
     end


List

 List variables in either normal or numstem mode. In numstem mode
 the variables are ordered by the stem tail, in normal mode they
 are listed in alphabetical order, meaning that TEXT.12 comes before
 TEXT.2.

 Default is to list variable name and data in colums. The name
 column default width is 30, the data column default width is 48. The
 name column width can be set by the NW parameter, the total line
 width can be set by the LW parameter. You can use '*' as name column
 width to use the width of the longest name selected.

 HDR(NO) suppresses the header.

 Samples
  list var(text*) hdr(testhdr)
   Lists all variables TEXT*.
  list var(text.) nw(*)
   Lists the TEXT. stem using the longest name as name column width.
  list var(text.) show(len) lw(130)
   Lists the TEXT. stem showing length for both name and data, and
   using 130 as total list width.
  list var(text.*c*) hdr(no)'
   Lists all variables TEXT*.C* with no header.

Rename

 Rename variables. The parameters are the same as COPY, as RENAME
 is really a combination of COPY and DROP.


Sort

 Sort a stem to itself or to a new stem.
 -    The variables are internally converted to variable length
      records, position values in the FIELDS parameter are adjusted
      automatically. But if you do overrides i.e. through the
      DSFPARMS libref, you must remember to add 4 to the position
      values.
 -    Large variables are supported, but you can only sort within
      positions 1-32740, this is a DFSORT limitation.
 -    Fields defaults to sorting the entire variable ascending.
 -    The Descending parameter will sort descending.
 -    The NODUP parameter will drop duplicate records.
 -    REXXVARS sort will create and drop variables REXXVAR$
      internally. If external sort is selected then the FIELDS
      parameter defaults to (5,4088,CH,A).

 Samples
  sort var(text.#) fields(1,8,ch,a,10,2,ch,a)
   Sort numeric stem TEXT by fields. The fist value of each quadlet
   (the position) will be adjusted internally to match.
  sort var(text.) fields(1,8,ch,a) ondata(*Doctor*)
   Filtered sort.
  sort var(text.) fields(1,8,ch,a) as(data.)
   Sort stem TEXT. creating new stem DATA.


STEM2TBL

 Copy a stem to an ISPF table. The table must exist. Table rows are
 added. The table may consist of multiple variables, but only one is
 set by this command.


TBL2STEM

 Copy an ISPF table to a stem. The table may contain multiple
 variables, but only one is used by this command.


Version

 Return REXXVARS version and assembly date-time.


View

 Same as EDIT, but without the SAVE.


Parameter descriptions

 all          - Index, process stem records with numeric suffix.

 append       - Sort, append to AS(stem) rather than replace.

 countn       - Number of records, variables or stack, to process
                after skipping skipn records.

 descending   - Sort descending.

 hdr          - Text to as header in list. The default is 'Listing
                varlist'.
 lastn        - Process only the lastn number of variables.

 listwidth    - Total width of list.

 mode         - Force sort mode External or Internal.

 namewidth    - Width of name column in list. Can be a specific
                value or '*' for using the widest name selected.

 newnamemask  - Mask for renaming variable(s), see Newnamemask
                below for details.

 NODUP        - SORT drop duplicate records.

 ondata       - Mask for filtering variables by their contents.

 panel        - ISPF panel name.
                 Default for browse is ISPBROBA.
                   -      -  edit is standard edit panel.
                   -      -  view is standard view panel.

 show         - Change how list is displayed.
  ALL          - include stem records with numeric suffix.
  LEN          - show lengths of name and data in the list. The
                 4-byte name length field is taken from the name
                 width value.
  S0           - show stem.0 when listing numeric stem.

 skipn        - Number of records, variables or stack, to skip
                before processing.

 sort-fields  - One or more quadlets, specified as with normal
                DFSORT: pos,length,type,direction i.e. 2,20,CH,A.
                The sort is done as a variable-length sort, so the
                'pos' field is internally adjusted, 4 is added, to
                allow for a pseudo RDW. You must take that into
                account if you do overrides by the DFSPARM libref
                or by other means.

 STack        - read from the stack.

 stemname     - stemname including trailing dot.

 TOStack      - write to the stack instead of a stem.

 varlist      - one or more variable names or masks as follows
  descrete      - Name without any generic chars, i.e. DATE.
  mask          - Name is a mask, see the Mask below for details.
  numstem       - Stemname ending with .#, i.e. TEXT.# - stem.0
                  must
                  contain the number of stem variables.
  genstem       - Stemname including trailing dot, functionally
                  equivalent to the mask stem.*

 varname          descrete variable name


Mask for filtering values

 Mask characters operation
  %        Matches any one character.
  *        Matches zero or more characters.


Mask for altering values

 Mask characters operation
  %        String character is copied to the output.
  'text'   Insert text. Maximum text length is 254.
  >        Advance cursor (=drop character).
  >'text'  Advance cursor to start of text in remainder of string.
           Maximum text length is 254.
  *        Copy remainder to output (position cursor).
  *'text'  Copy string characters from the current position to text,
           'text' itself is not copied. Maximum text length is 254.
  ?>text?if-found?not-found?
           If text matches string anywhere at or after cursor then
           use if-found mask, else use not-found mask. Either mask
           may be null. Maximum text length is 254.
  \        The char following in the mask is copied to output, this
           allows you to copy a mask character - i.e. \%
  other    Mask character is copied.


 Special variables created

  REXXVARS_GETN    number of variables read.
  REXXVARS_OUTN    number of variables written.
  REXXVARS_RSN     reason if rc gt 0
  REXXVARS_STAT    various statistics, currently in the format:
                    NMAXL(nmaxl) DMAXL(dmaxl) NAMEN(namen) GETN(getn)
                    OUTN(outn) SORT(sortmode)
                    CMN(cmn)
                    where
                     cmn       for internal sort, the number of compares
                               done.
                     dmaxl     maximum data length
                     getn      numer of variables read passing data-
                               and other filters.
                     namen     number of names selected
                     nmaxl     maximum name length
                     outn      number of variables written, including
                               dynamically created stem.0 for index.
                     sortmode  Sort mode selected, E = external or
                               I = internal


Installation notes

 The program will by default reload itself thus retaining the module
 in the JPAQ. This improves performance for multiple calls
 significantly. This load will not be done if the program is added to
 the LPA, which is the recommended placement.
 You can disable the self-load option by removing the 'CDEUCTZ2'
 statement.


Contact info
 email   willy@harders-jensen.com
 web     https://harders-jensen.com  (newest version here)
